---
layout: post
title: "OCD Dev Log #004"
date: 2025-05-02
author: Jason Pena
---

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 Jason Pena <jasonpena@awkless.com>
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

## Plans for the Future

OCD version 0.6.1 was released to [Crates.io][ocd-crates-io] 6 or so days ago.
During that time, I found a number of bugs that needed fixing. In general,
version 0.6.1 was more of a practice release. The project is the first ever Rust
crate I have ever published, and I just wanted to get a handle on how to use
`cargo publish` correctly.

Thus, the next release will be geared towards stabilzation. I want to elimate as
many bugs I can for version 0.7.0. As it stands, I refactored a good portion of
the codebase, and fixed many of the issues I found. Hopefully, by this weekend
version 0.7.0 will be released.

## Cool Things Done so Far

### Refactors

The OCD codebase implements most of its core logic for repository store
manipulation through the `store` module. Originally, this module contained a
massive type named `Git`. The `Git` type implemented 90% of the logic that was
needed to implement the command-set for version 0.6.1. The other public facing
types (`Root`, `Node`, `MultiNodeClone`, and `TablizeCluster`) effectively acted
as wrappers over the `Git` type itself.

The issue mainly boils down to `Git` becoming a _god class_. Thus, to amend this
issue I refactored out its core functionality into the following separate types:

- `RepoEntry` handles logic for repository manipulation.
- `RepoEntryBuilder` buider for `RepoEntry`.
- `Deployment` special trait for deployment action strategies.
    - `BareAliasDeployment` deployment strategy for bare-alias repositories.
    - `NormalDeployment` deployment strategy for normal repositories.
    - `RootDeployment` deployment strategy for root repository.
- `RepoEntryDeployer` directory object responsible for running `Deployment`
  strategies.

The above listing of types and APIs now fully replace the `Git` type. This setup
is more modular, and hopefully more testable.

### Testing

Recently I created a new way to test repository APIs in `store` module through
the usage of Go's txtar format. I created the `tests::GitFixture` type to easily
create repository fixtures whose entire index and tree history is comprised of
data issued through special txtar files. The following is a sample setup:

```rust
#[dir_cases("src/tests/fixture/some_func")]
#[sealed_test(env = [
    ("XDG_CONFIG_HOME", ".config/ocd"),
    ("XDG_DATA_HOME", ".local/share/ocd/root"),
])]
fn smoke_some_func(_: &str, contents: &str) -> Result<()> {
    let pwd = std::env::current_dir()?;
    std::fs::create_dir_all(".config/ocd")?;
    std::env::set_var("HOME", &pwd);

    let txtar = Archive::from(contents);
    let git = GitFixture::new(".local/share/ocd/root", GitKind::Bare)?;
    for file in txtar.iter() {
        git.stage_and_commit(&file.name, &file.content)?;
    }
    run_script!(&txtar.comment())?;

    // Testing occurs here...

    Ok(())
}
```

Through the usage of `simple_test_case`, `sealed_test`, and `simple_txtar`
crates, I can now test any API that relies on Git or libgit2 code in a few
lines of rust. That `run_script!(&txtar.comment())?` line is how I can issue
shell script commands through a txtar file's comment section to further enhance
the setup of the test itself. Here is a sample txtar file to show what I mean:

```
# Deploy repository beforehand...
git --git-dir .local/share/ocd/root --work-dir .config/ocd checkout

-- cluster.toml --
dir_alias = "$HOME"
excluded = ["LICENSE*", "README*"]

-- LICENSE --
Copy of license right here!

-- README.txt --
Introduce newcomers to root of cluster!
```

The above txtar file contains three files: `cluster.toml`, `LICENSE`, and
`README.txt`. These files will be staged and commited into a fixture repository
from the sample test code. Finally, the comment section issues a Git command
that will perform a bare-alias deployment into the `.config/ocd` directory
from a repository named "root".

Super simple way to test logic from the `store` module! Now I just need to
actually implement full test coverage for most of the APIs in the `store`
module for version 0.7.0.

## Bug Fixes

I realized that giving the user to deploy their root repository anywhere they
want was a bad idea. OCD always expects the cluster definition to be defined
at `$HOME/.config/ocd/cluster.toml`. However, the user can set the root
repository's directory alias to some weird path that violates this rule like
`$HOME/.local/share` resulting in `$HOME/.local/share/ocd/cluster.toml`. Thus,
I fixed this issue by limiting the deployment of root to only two locations:
their home directory or OCD's configuration directory.

I want the user to have the ability to deploy root straight into their home
directory in case they decide to use a monolithic structure for their dotfile
organization through OCD.

There are a few bugs I need to fix still, but this one seems to be the most
important one right now.

## Conclusion

All in all, development of OCD is coming together quite nicely towards version
0.7.0. Hopefully, this project will make my resume pop!

[ocd-crates-io]: crates.io/crates/ocd
