---
layout: post
title: "OCD Dev Log #000"
date: 2025-04-20
author: Jason Pena
---

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 Jason Pena <jasonpena@awkless.com>
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

> __NOTE__: This entry was digitised from my personal bullet journal. Thus, a
> lot of textual clean up was done to make my thoughts more coherent compared to
> my notebook.

## The Concept of a Cluster

OCD operats on a cluster. A cluster is a collection of repositories that can be
deployed together. A cluster is comprised of two major components: the __cluster
definition__, and the __repository store__. The cluster definition is a special
configuration file that defines the entries of a cluster that OCD needs to
manage. The repository store houses the actual repositories defined as entries
to a cluster from the cluster definition. The cluster definition is located at
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/ocd/cluster.toml`, while the repository store is at
`$XDG_DATA_HOME/ocd`.

The _cluster definition_ contains two entry types: __root__ and __nodes__. A
root houses the cluster itself, and nodes are various external repositories to
deploy. A given entry type can be defined as one of two kinds: normal or
bare-alias. A normal entry represents a normal Git repository whose gitdir and
workdir point to the same path. A bare-alias, entry is a bare repository that
uses a directory as an alias for a worktree. The root itself is a bare-alias
repository that contains the cluster definition itself. There can only be one
root, and it must always be deployed, Nodes can be normal or bare-alias.

The _repository store_ follows the same structure as the cluster definition.
There is only one root repository named "root" that is always deployed. There a
set of node repositories named by whatever name given in the cluster definition.

> __NOTE__: OCD generally follows the [XDG Base Directory standard][xdg-spec]
> for the placement of configuration data. Although, the code base uses the
> [dirs][dirs-crate] crate, which allows OCD to follow [Known
> Folder][known-folder] (Windows) and [Standard Directories][std-dirs] (MacOS).

[xdg-spec]: https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/latest/
[dirs-crate]: https://docs.rs/dirs/latest/dirs/
[known-folder]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/desktop/legacy/bb776911(v=vs.85)?redirectedfrom=MSDN
[std-dirs]: https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/FileManagement/Conceptual/FileSystemProgrammingGuide/FileSystemOverview/FileSystemOverview.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40010672-CH2-SW6
