.TH OCD-DEPLOY "1" "May 2025" "ocd 0.8.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ocd-deploy - deploy target entries in cluster
.SH SYNOPSIS
ocd deploy [options] [target]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Deploy selected cluster entries to their working directory targets. Any
dependencies will also be deployed by default. Defined node entries that do
not exist in the repository store will automatically be cloned through their
\fBurl\fR target.
.sp
Deployment of normal entries, i.e., not bare-alias, will cause this command to
only check if they have been cloned into the repository store, and skip them.
Normal entries cannot be deployed, because they do not have alias working trees
to deploy in the first place.
.sp
Finally, the deployment of root will also be skipped, because root is always
deployed no matter what.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-o, \-\-only
.RS 4
Do not deploy dependencies of targets.
.RE
.sp
.PP
\-w, \-\-with-excluded
.RS 4
Include excluded files during deployment of targets.
.RE
.sp
.PP
\-h, \-\-help
.RS 4
Print help message for this command.
.RE
.sp
.PP
[target]...
.RS 4
List of comma separated cluster entry names to deploy.
.sp
User can use glob matching patterns to select targets. See
<https://docs.rs/glob/latest/glob/struct.Pattern.html> for listing of accepted
patterns. Be sure to quote targets to avoid the shell from expanding them.
.RE
.sp
.SH EXAMPLES
Assume that root, bash, and polyglot_ps1 have been defined as entries of
the cluster such that polyglot_ps1 is a dependency of bash. Thus, the following
will cause both bash and polyglot_ps1 to be deployed together:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd deploy bash
.RE
.sp
If we do not want polyglot_ps1 to be deployed with bash, then we can do this
instead:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd deploy -o bash
.RE
.sp
Root is always deployed by default, but we can still request that its excluded
files be deployed as well like so:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd deploy -w root
.RE
.SH OCD
Part of the \fBocd\fR(1) command-set.
