.TH OCD "1" "May 2025" "ocd 0.8.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ocd-clone \- Clone existing cluster from root repository.
.SH SYNOPSIS
ocd clone [options] <url>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Clone existing cluster from a target root repository. This root repository will
be cloned, and deployed to whatever target working directory alias that was
issued by the root configuration file housed in the root repository. Afterward,
all node entries apart of the cluster definition that was deployed from the
root repository will also be cloned asynchronously.
.sp
The process of cloning node repositories displays a progress bar to show how
far along the task is to completion. If any credential information is needed to
perform the clone for any node (including the root itself), then all clone
tasks will be blocked to await user input from either the terminal or some
external authentication program.
.sp
Any failure for node cloning will not cancel other clone tasks in progress.
Instead, all clone task failures will be reported \fBafter\fR all other clone
tasks are finished. However, if root fails to clone properly, then both the
configuration directory at \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/ocd\fR, and the repository
store at \fB$XDG_DATA_HOME/ocd\fR will be wiped out so the user can either
retry the URL, or use a different URL without issue.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-j, \-\-jobs <limit>
.RS 4
Number of threads to use per node clone.
.RE
.sp
.PP
\-h, \-\-help
.RS 4
Print help message for this command.
.RE
.sp
.PP
<url>
.RS 4
The URL to clone root repository from. See \fBgit-clone\fR(1) section GIT URLS
to learn about all different URL formats that OCD can accept.
.RE
.SH FILES
.IP \[bu]
Root repositories with a working directory alias pointing to OCD's configuration
directory must have a \fBroot.toml\fR file at the top-level.
.IP \[bu]
Root repositories with a working directory alias pointing to the user's home
directory must have a \fBroot.toml\fR file in the \fB.config/ocd\fR directory.
.SH EXAMPLES
Assume that https://github.com/user/root.git contains a cluster that we want to
deploy onto the current machine. To setup this cluster, we just need to do the
following:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd clone https://github.com/user/root.git
.RE
.sp
The clone command will handle the cloning of the root repository and any node
entries, and deploy root itself in one shot. The machine will now have a new
cluster to work with through just one command!
.SH OCD
Part of the \fBocd\fR(1) command-set.
