.TH OCD-RM "1" "May 2025" "ocd 0.8.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ocd-rm \- remove target entries from cluster
.SH SYNOPSIS
ocd clone [options] [target]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Remove target entries from the cluster. The target entry's configuration file
and repository will be removed from the cluster definition, and the repository
store. If the entry was deployed, then it will be undeployed before removal.
.sp
If root is targeted, then the user will be prompted about its removal. If the
user accepts, then this command will proceed with undeploying all entries, and
delete the entire cluster by nuking the cluster definition, repository store
in one shot.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-h, \-\-help
.RS 4
Print help message for this command.
.RE
.sp
.PP
[target]...
.RS 4
List of comma separated cluster entry names to remove.
.sp
User can use glob matching patterns to select targets. See
<https://docs.rs/glob/latest/glob/struct.Pattern.html> for listing of accepted
patterns. Be sure to quote targets to avoid the shell from expanding them.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
Assume that root, bash, and polyglot_ps1 have been defined as entries of
the cluster such that polyglot_ps1 is a dependency of bash. Lets remove bash:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd rm bash
.RE
.sp
This will only remove bash despite having polyglot_ps1 as a dependency. The
user must specify the names of each entry they want to remove. Dependencies
are ignored always.
.sp
The following will nuke the entire cluster from the filesystem if the user
accepts:
.sp
.RS 4
ocd rm root
.RE
.SH OCD
Part of the \fBocd\fR(1) command-set.
